this is a potentially depressing subject
but I'm not going to talk about it in a
depressing manner let's talk about this
with some verben tenacity as much as I
can muster on this Friday night Victoria
BC Canada I got a message from crazy cow
man it's not an insult that's the name
he uses on YouTube crazy cow man he may
have some new comments below this video
and he told me very matter-of-factly
that he is planning to commit suicide
and before you jump in and say seek
professional help isn't that just like
the ethical homily of our times isn't
that the fig-leaf of postmodern morality
in 2018 oh you have a problem seek
profession oh you're coming to me for
help no no I'm not gonna tell you to
[ __ ] off I'm not gonna tell you I'm not
addressed no care I'm gonna say seek
professional help and the subtext is
whatever your problem is I don't want to
be my bro no before you jump in and say
seek professional help let's just note
he already saw professional help he
already got the maximum amount of help
that professional could give him he
actually checked himself into a
psychiatric hospital he engaged in
counseling therapy and ultimately even
SSRI antidepressant drug therapy even
though he'd seen the criticism of this
the presentation of scientific facts
about this on my channel he was aware it
was very unlikely to help him but as a
last resort he even tried that and he
reports the only effect he noticed from
the use of Prozac was sexual dysfunction
anyway he's looking ahead to suicide in
the near future he is planning on it and
he has sought professional help I'm
gonna start this video not by answering
his plea for help or advice but by
addressing that homily itself going
around telling people seek professional
help
um if somebody in your life comes to you
wanting to talk about a personal or
psychological problem and it may seem
like a silly way to put it but let's
face it personal problems can never be
disentangled from psychological problems
if you have a problem at work or does
some extent it's gonna involve your
psychological perception of the problems
going to vote your feelings your
thoughts in a some
and so on uh hmm you have a problem with
your girlfriend with your boyfriend but
with your career with your education
with all these things of course there's
there's a psychological element I think
the worst thing you can do friend to
friend co-worker to co-worker talking to
your relative your cousin somebody
you've known for many years the worst
thing you can do is recuse yourself the
worst thing you can do is say oh no no I
don't have a university degree in
psychology I don't have credentials in
psychiatry I'm not a licensed therapist
therefore you should quote/unquote see
professional help if you've known
someone for 15 years you have advantages
in talking them but their personal
problems their psychological problems
any of your problems you have advantages
that a therapist will never be able to
catch up with in a series of 45-minute
sessions okay just you know your ability
to hear their problem in the context of
their past problems in the context of
their past life your ability to
challenge their assumptions their
memories um they may be lying to you
they may be lying to themselves they may
be so upset that their misconstruing
things in their own life while sincerely
trying to be honest trying to be honest
you trying to because themselves if
you've known someone for 15 years you
can say no no wait that didn't happen
first you guys move to another city then
you broke up right like that didn't this
happen first and that happened you know
if somebody says to you something in a
personal conversation someone you've
known for years and you just stop and
say wait are you really telling me
that's what Carol said look that doesn't
sound like slang Carol say can you show
me the email and they get out their
phone and show you the email and then
you look at the email it's like oh you
see you you miss remember this or you
read too much into this you
misinterpreted it that kind of process
is never going to happen with a
therapist and again people may not lie
down on the couch or may not sit you may
not lie down in the therapists office
intentionally wanting to mislead their
therapist but in large part
that is what happens um most people are
not capable of giving an objective
account to a complete stranger a
professional but what their problems are
and where they come from or even if they
could it would be so many hours in so
many months of therapy just to get a
therapist to catch up to the level of
knowledge of this person that a friend
might have after five years of
experience 15 years of experience would
have you I mean the fundamental crisis
here is that most people do not have
friends they can go to with this kind of
serious problem they don't have
co-workers and they don't have somebody
like a Buddhist monk who's known that
for many years now look Buddhist monks
may be the worst person maybe the worst
people you can go to if you're
contemplating suicide or dealing with
personal and psychological problems but
in some traditional communities a
religious authority figure was someone
who might have known you since the day
you were born and may have been
following the events of your life to
some extent of what I have you might be
able to provide this this kind of
counseling right now what is the
function of counseling I think one of
the greatest misconceptions here is the
idea that the detachment and objectivity
of the therapist is essential and these
are really terms to glorify ignorance
and their lack of involvement is a huge
problem also my father had trouble
telling the truth and you know he really
enjoyed lying I would say his condition
could be described as storytellers
syndrome there's nothing he enjoyed more
than sitting down with a therapist and
presenting a well-balanced symmetrical
and pleasing story a story that had all
the elements of well structured fiction
because it only had a very weak and
tangental relationship to the truth and
I know for a fact but you know my father
and I we basically stopped talking for
10 years during those 10 years we had a
few e-mails back and forth I know that
he sat down and talked to therapists or
possibly psychoanalysts
psychiatrists you know I don't know the
particulars every time you got
professional help and he talked about
his relationship with me right but the
therapist the professional never talked
to me right the therapist the
professional never actually read the
email for me right the therapist would
only hear my father talking about his
feelings of hope they received from me
and let me tell you my father like a lot
of people maybe he's an extreme example
maybe I was in common with other people
my father was not capable of telling the
truth not even if he wanted to he could
not tell you the truth about something
that touched his ego not even
necessarily something made him
vulnerable if he couldn't tell the truth
was something that that that impacted
his sense of grandiosity to be honestly
he wouldn't have been capable of telling
the truth if you wanted to and you may
not have wanted to that may not be what
you enjoyed and then from the therapists
perspective what is this process very
very briefly have to remember the
therapists have their own biases built
into these scenarios therapists don't
particularly want to hear an honest but
broken and incoherent narrative they
don't really want to hear you break down
or watch you break down they'd be much
more pleased to have a seemingly you
know erudite well-spoken and charismatic
person present them with this with this
well fashioned story which is exactly
what my father could do but what the
therapist couldn't do was interrogate
him in return the therapist could not or
would I maybe this will change in the
future maybe in the future therapists
will employ private investigators will
employ detectives to go and check if
their clients are telling them the truth
or not because there are outrageous lies
that people tell again sometimes the
best of intentions sometimes it's
because they're lying to themselves and
sometimes the intentions are darker than
that sometimes people want to
fundamentally indulge their own sense of
grandiosity they may go to a therapist
just wanted to have their their notions
reinforced but the fundamental service
you can provide with no diploma in
psychoanalysis
or psychiatry or no licenses of licensed
therapists the fundamental service you
can provide is whatever depth of
knowledge you have of this person you
know them for five years 10 years 15
years you can challenge what they think
they know you can challenge the they'll
tell you what they feel you can
challenge why do you feel this way you
know and you can explore with them how
they built up these assumptions in the
particular age maybe how they built up
these resentments or these feelings of
anger or this sense of disappointment I
mean sorry whether it's something
professional or romantic whatever the
personal problem is if I have known you
long enough that I know what your
assumptions were when you started the
job and then your sense of
disappointment now I can say to you well
yeah you see that now but at the time
this is what you told me that's
invaluable and a therapist can't do that
a psychiatrist or I said call just can't
do that and a psychiatrist or
psychologist also is not even just gonna
open up your Facebook or go back to that
email you sense it will wait you know
what that was back in 2014 you said that
no no that's you know you got it mixed
up you know and get they may not be
mixing it up intentionally but people do
when they feel strongly so guys what
professionals can offer above all else
in 2018 professionals go for our
prescription drugs and as we've explored
recently on the channel the value of
those prescription drugs is shockingly
low now professionals can also offer you
know what's referred to as mirroring in
therapy they can offer to sit there with
you and sympathize with you and
empathize with you and listen to you you
know they can offer a certain kind of
detached perspective but what's gonna be
utterly lacking are exactly all the
things that an old friend can bring to
the table so if you are someone's old
friend do not fall into this trap
do not repeat this excuse this homily
what I think is ultimately an evil
cop-out presented as a compassion
gesture do not tell people to seek
professional help you're saying two
things one you're basically saying that
this person is crazy that their that
their condition is so bad they need a
higher level of psychiatric care that
they need to see a professional that
they need to be institutionalized this
needs to be treated as a medical problem
right and you're also really saying your
problem is not my problem I'm not I'm
not gonna listen and I'm not gonna get
involved and probably what they eat is
not just someone to listen and someone
to get involved but someone to challenge
them someone to really give them a new
perspective on problems that obviously
they're already familiar with you know
from their own perspective and yeah
maybe the best therapists can do that
maybe the best counselors can do that
but I don't know I'm not a great
optimist I think that is actually very
very rare that you get that of
counseling and therapy sessions on the
contrary most of your time and energy if
you go to see a counselor or therapist
psych well psychoanalyst or psychologist
is like just goes into trying to give
them the backstory that a personal
friend would already have from years ago
not even a close friend maybe a
co-worker I mean you know sorry I
remember going to see a counselor or
therapist of some kind with my ex-wife
before we split up before we got
divorced and like do you know how many
hours it would take just to get someone
in that position when you seek
professional help just to explain to
them oh yeah I was living in Cambodia
this was the kind of research I was
doing in Cambodia and the guy was
interested he was fascinated for him
this was great he was you know this was
so much better than just talking to
alcoholics about how hard it is to quit
alcohol or talking to victims of
childhood sexual abuse about how you
know devastated they are by their sexual
trauma you know for him this was
wonderful I was his favorite client I
could sit there and in a well-educated
erudite way you know use up the hours
and talk about you know philosophy and
history and politics and what I was
studying and what research I was doing
we're living did it help our problems at
the marriage absolutely not there was
zero positive outcome for us and I mean
unless you're someone who's in such a
strange state of denial
that it's liberating for you to describe
to a detached outsider what your
problems are you know certain type of
characters like that I think
stereotypically especially you know a
century or two ago someone who maybe
grew up in the Christian religion it
might be liberating for them to
basically have this form of confessional
communication outside of the church and
then just to hear what they're saying
out of their own mouth when they
describe their problems because they
keep that bottled up and say oh wow
now I have a new perspective it's just
for that reason but most of us
especially 2018 that's not the case so
there's the lure of prescription drugs
solving your problem there's the lure of
a diagnosis that there may be a fancy
latin term in a book that's gonna
categorize and label exactly what your
problem is but behind the door behind
the mahogany door of professional health
the seemingly impressive edifice of
modern medical science as applied to our
personal and psychological problems
there is not a lot there and you know at
age 39
I feel Continent saying those
professionals have very very little to
offer you not even in contrast to a
close friend and a strange friend an
ex-girlfriend or ex-boyfriend or even
like a work colleague who's known you
for many years there would be advantages
in talking to any of those types of
people over seeking professional help so
when you're in that position when you're
the friend someone is talking to maybe
even if you're the extra or her
ex-boyfriend which can be very
uncomfortable I'd urge you not to
retreat behind us this well-worn homily
of C professional no look the problem is
situation is I think I've already
foreshadowed my answer and why it's
gonna be so brief I don't know this guy
I mean obviously he sought professional
help he has exhausted what professional
help can do for him he has told me
nothing about what his problem is what's
brought him this point why he's so
certain that he's gonna commit suicide
so I am gonna answer in the most general
terms possible partly because there's
another youtuber who I'm not going to
name
I call him Dave Dave is not his real
there was no youtuber was talking about
suicide and talking about his problems
and I wrote to him privately in response
to that with the following set of
reflections many many many people in our
21st century english-speaking
industrialized Western culture many
people are what I would call objective
oriented people they're motivated in
relation to specific objectives like
they have an objective they want to go
to medical school and become a medical
doctor etc that this is an objective and
their desire for that objective
resembles the desire to live but it is
not in fact the desire to live and it's
actually quite dangerous to confuse the
two many people I think especially
stereotypically heterosexual men set out
at any given time a number of these
objectives and the pursuit of those
objectives becomes a substitute for the
actual enjoyment of life or actually
wanting to be alive or even actually
thinking about or philosophizing about
life and this has advantages and
disadvantages
obviously this provides with a certain
kind of focus direction etc but because
of this cultural background I think most
people are gonna look at someone who's
stereotypically suicidal now dealing
with two examples crazy cow man and and
Dave they're gonna look at someone like
that and say well what you need is to be
passionately motivated in the pursuit of
some objective now this gets into the
type of problem I discuss on my channel
all the time
perceiving weakness as strength wanting
something wanting it is not a strength
it's a weakness and it doesn't just
create emotional vulnerability it is an
emotional vulnerability so you know you
want to be a medical doctor and you want
it and you want to
you want it and you know if you then
flunk out of medical school you can't
get your prerequisites you can't get the
medical degree this can be a tragedy
that reshapes your entire life you're
suddenly cut off from that that sense of
you know desire Direction motivation etc
but moreover most people's desires are
not that wholesome and not that finite
so the YouTuber I was talking to he was
talking about being fueled by the desire
to be wealthy he specifically said to be
a millionaire the desire to have Fame
and he didn't say it explicitly but I
think very much implicitly he was dying
with a desire to be adored by women you
know etc and he's trying to draw a
strength of that he's trying to feel
stoked up and motivated and there's a
sense of being powerful from wanting
something so much and even visualizing
it and you know Fanning the flames of
this desire of building up your sense of
desire in your mind and he thinks of
this as a positive motivation that
overcomes suicidal thoughts or suicidal
tendencies
right and here's the problem wanting is
not having wanting it I understand the
sense where empirically it may feel like
strength but this actually is weakness
it's not just that this creates sorrow
or leads to sorrow this actually is a
form of sorrow that you're miss
perceiving as pleasure because you're
fantasizing about it and because also in
the same way that extreme hunger can
make you feel strong the desperation to
eat when you've really gone hungry for
too long
that very desperation again it creates
the illusion of strength you know you've
you you feel well you you feel like
you're moving faster you're thinking
faster you're you're struggling to get
food you know when it would as you
whatever whether it's that you're
fasting or something for some reason
you're experiencing starvation like
conditions you may perceive that
strength in fact it is weakness right
now the actual solution to this problem
the specific problems I vote here is not
to think in terms of wanting things I
mean not to in this guy's case he was
overcoming his suicidal thoughts or his
you know his despondent sorrowful
thoughts by trying to visualize how much
he wants to be a millionaire or how much
he wants to achieve fame and these
things someone else's case maybe how
much they want to become a medical
doctor go to med school or some of this
and then visualizing and thinking about
it and building up this this this
feeling of wanting really what I claim
here is that what you're building up is
sorrow and what you're creating is
emotional bitterness non emotional
strength there is a different approach
to this which is to instead try to
cultivate detachment and detachment is I
think one of the underrated virtues in
modern Western culture believe me it's
also underrated within modern Asian
Buddhism you can have detachment about
things you want and what they mean that
you you can regard these things in it
now I actually I had a specific
illustration of this the difference
between wanting something powerfully and
being detached in your pursuit of it
which was you know relationships between
heterosexual men and women men pursuing
women you know romantically I think
again maybe the majority of men when
they're young and inexperienced they
think that the way to do this is to
build up their passion is to want
something so much to be over overcome
with emotion and desire and then at some
point they have to mature and learn no
the way to talk to women the way to
approach them and the way to even
evaluate women if women are approaching
you women are the way to evaluate the
offer think about starting the
relationship relationship is from a
position of detachment and sorry if you
just think about this detachment isn't
indifference detachment isn't not caring
but it is certainly a situation where
you are thinking rationally and you have
some
kind of separation between that rational
process and your emotional process so
that you're able to evaluate the things
themselves and you're able to evaluate
your own emotions your feelings about
them and you're able to evaluate even
your own process of evaluation this is
the situation we want to be in whether
you're trying to start a new romantic
relationship or whether you're thinking
your way out of you know maybe a career
dead-end like you wanted to be a medical
doctor you can't be or you're thinking
your way out of whatever the impasse is
in life that leads you to be suicidal so
this is an interesting train of thought
advice that came up when I was looking
at another youtuber who'd been suicidal
lately who I'm referring to here as
David the problem is here with crazy cow
man I suspect that he may be in the
opposite situation that his problem
isn't that he's burning with these
desires with motivation with wanting
someone but that he feels no desire at
all that the problem is simply because I
get no description of what this is why
it is that he simply wants to die which
is simply that he he has no desire it's
not he doesn't want to become a medical
doctor he doesn't want to achieve fame
and fortune or any of these other kind
of shallow things um there's he doesn't
want to achieve anything intellectually
or what-have-you and you know look
ultimately I respect all tomato juice to
die however with all these Cavett's have
misstated I don't know you I've never
talked to you I don't know you as well
as a friend who's known you for five
years and I recognize you've already
sought professional help and you've
exhausted what counseling can do for you
I really would recommend that you try to
engage in one of the most basic
instincts we have from birth and that is
curiosity if you can try to Kindle your
sense of curiosity for almost anything
if you can try experimentally
to challenge your own ignorance of other
things whether those are tidbits from
history you never understood whether
that's sir there's an example that's
become an internet meme how do magnets
work if you can go around if you can
keep a notepad if you can start noticing
things and start investigating things
and start challenging yourself and
trying to cultivate curiosity itself I
think that curiosity is the the kindling
out of which you know that kind of
objective oriented motivation sparks
right why live I mean ultimately why
live I don't think that we live for the
satisfaction of our desires for the
pursuit of our of our desires I don't
think we even believe we live for the
pursuit of happiness
to use a well-worn phrase the meaning of
life or the process of finding meaning
in life ultimately its most basic
rudiments must begin with curiosity
so the encouragement I can give you is
to try to exercise that most childlike
and most infantile and most pure part of
your mind the part of the human
experience where for the first time you
looked at letters on a chalkboard and
didn't know what they were or probably
wasn't on a chalkboard you probably saw
a sign through a window and and you
wondered what things were and wondered
how they worked and I mean this
sincerely it could be anything it could
be plumbing that you never thought of it
before how to fix a tap anything whether
you do with your hands more than with
your your brain if you can encourage
yourself in weather in the most
childlike way or in the most
scientifically pretentious way possible
to try to exercise your sense of
curiosity I think that will that will
not put you back in touch with your
humanity it will not put you in touch
with any kind of profound mystery about
the beauty of a few
in life it will start to put you back in
touch with the material reality of what
this world is and of what your
relationship to it is which is
ultimately the relationship of an
infinitely ignorant investigator and
that is what makes day-to-day life so
dynamic and so rewarding and what makes
us want to keep living as we get older
and older is not the pursuit of one
desire after another not one fantasy
after another building up our sense of
desire not disappointment and
disillusionment and overcoming those
things and in my opinion not social
status or a sense of wanting revenge
against others or trying to prove others
wrong or something like this you know if
you can get back to that working up from
the bare rudiment of curiosity that
instinct that so rarely is even given a
name I think that's a first step that I
can recommend wholeheartedly without
even knowing what the second step might
be for you live or die for you the
question of whether or not you can find
a meaningful life a meaningful way to
live or a new attitude towards living
that makes your experience of life
meaningful for you
right now its life in that struggle so
literally and figuratively back to the
chalkboard